    title: How to work on a third-party NuGet package and verify its work in your application
    description: My practice of working on NuGet packages when I need to verify changes in my application locally.
---

Every so often, I find myself in a situation when I need to change something in
one of the open-source .NET libraries I use. Sometimes, when contributing to a
third-party library, I want to verify the changes in my own application
immediately. There could be various reasons for doing this: either I want to
validate the resulting design of my changes, and whether they'll be useful in a
real environment, or I'm developing a complicated protocol that should better be
checked in my application before being contributed to an upstream library.

Either way, I need to install a changed version of a library into my local
application without too much fuss, and it's not an easy task. People sometimes
start to replace stuff in their local NuGet storage (`~/.nuget`) and develop
[some devious scripts][avalonia.scripts] devoted to this purpose, or recommend
adding `<ProjectReference Include="..\..\library-source\library.fsproj">` into
the sources of your own application.

After a couple of tries, I have inferred my own—somewhat successful—practice of
working on such packages, which I've decided to describe in this post for
further reference.

First of all, you'll need to figure out how is the library versioned (e.g. what
do you need to change to publish a new version of the library), and how do you
produce `*.nupkg` packages of the library. In modern world, it is often simple,
because almost everyone uses `dotnet pack`, but for some more complex projects
it could become a very hard or unobvious task.

After that, you may follow this protocol:

1. Make the desired changes in the library code.
2. Update the library version (e.g. to `1.0.0-pre`)—usually by changing its
   project file—and then prepare its `*.nupkg` (e.g. by calling `dotnet pack`
   on its sources).
3. Create a directory for temporary NuGet storage on your disk (for example, I
   have it in my `TEMP` directory, it is called `T:\Temp\nuget-source` and is
   shared between all the projects I use).
4. Copy the `*.nupkg` file over to that storage directory. It is now a NuGet
   feed.
5. Create a `nuget.config` file in your application project (get the template by
   running `dotnet new nugetconfig` in your terminal). If you want to share the
   config between multiple projects, you may place it in a parent directory. For
   example, if I want all my projects in `W:\Projects` to get this new feed,
   then I could create a file named `W:\Projects\nuget.config`.
6. Add the following item into your `nuget.config`:

   ```xml
   <configuration>
     <packageSources>
       <add key="local" value="T:\Temp\nuget-source" />
     </packageSources>
   </configuration>
   ```
7. You're all set. Now, add or update the library version dependency in your
   application (usually by updating the `<PackageReference Version="…" />`
   attribute), and test it out.

After you perform this procedure a couple of times, you'll get used to it, and
it will become very easy and straightforward to contribute to any third-party
libraries and check the changes in your local applications.

[avalonia.scripts]: https://github.com/AvaloniaUI/Avalonia/blob/349d93b7d673e9c96a28fff95ea211fc0fc97b15/scripts/ReplaceNugetCache.ps1
